Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek. ...Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber. ...The elephant elder. ...And today's story... is the morning a parrot blamed the wind for something the wind did not do.
Today... I want to ask you something, little ones. ...A question the wise people in the Bible used to ask each other a long, long time ago. ...What does it mean... to tell the truth? ...Even when it's hard. ...Even when nobody saw. ...Listen carefully. ...The answer's in the story.
Now... gather round, little ones. Come close by the pond.
Old Timber — Old Timber, is this — is this the parrot one? ...Is this... is this the one about ME?
Mm. ...Yes, Garingo. ...It is, in fact, the parrot one. ...Bless your bright feathers. ...Settle in. ...You come out of this one alright.
...Generous. ...That's generous.
Now... settle in. ...Here we go.
Now, this was a few weeks back, when the summer mornings were quiet and the sky did that pale-bright thing it does before the sun decides to wake up properly. ...And the pond — bless its quiet face — was so still you could have read your reflection like a book.
And on a flat little perch of stone, right at the pond's edge, sat a small grey rock. ...Round. ...Smooth. ...And to anybody walking past — bless their hurry — just a rock. ...But to one tortoise we know... it was her favourite thing in the whole reserve.
Now... the wind that morning — and you should remember this for later — the wind that morning was barely moving. ...Just enough to lift a leaf. ...Not enough to lift much else. ...Hold on to that, little ones.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And high in the branches of the big old oak, just above that flat little perch, sat Garingo the parrot — all bright feathers and dramatic flourish. ...Now, that morning, he had decided — and I quote, because he announced it twice — that today was the day. ...He was going to do... ...a loop-the-loop.
BEHOLD! ...The aerial debut! ...Today — and you may write this in stone — Garingo, of the bright feathers and the brave heart, ascends! ...Pirouettes! ...And descends! ...IN ONE MOTION!
And from down on the path, where the dew was just starting to give up, came two voices — one heavy, one fast — both unmistakably here for the show. ...And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash. ...He called up,
[excited] OH! ...OH! ...A LOOP-THE-LOOP?! ...Garingo, I LOVE loop-the-loops! ...I've never seen one but I LOVE them already! ...I got this — I mean — YOU got this! ...You got it! ...Do it!
And Zippy the hummingbird darted in, going so fast she was three places at once. ...She squeaked,
[excited] Wait — wait — I just had SEVEN ideas! ...Garingo, you need a RUNWAY! ...And a LANDING ZONE! ...And — and somebody to YELL the countdown — that's ME — that's my JOB — okay — okay — three! ...two! ...one — ...wait — is he ready? ...Are we ready? ...I'M ready. ...Three! ...Two!
I AM ready! ...I have been ready since I was born! ...Garingo — TAKES — FLIGHT!
And so — bless his bright feathers and his slightly too-ambitious heart — he leapt. ...He flapped. ...He climbed. ...He turned. ...And — well — the turn... was a little wider than the branch had planned for.
...Whoa. ...WHOA. ...Whoa whoa — branch — branch! ...That is a — that is a CLOSE branch!
Now, what happened next — and the listener saw all of this, mind — was that Garingo, in the middle of his very brave and very wide loop, clipped a branch with his tail-feather. ...The branch dipped. ...The dip jostled a leaf. ...The leaf bumped a twig. ...The twig nudged a small grey rock that had been sitting peacefully on a perch all summer. ...And the rock... ...fell.
And on its way down... it hit the perch's edge... ...and cracked... ...clean down the middle.
[whispers] ...Oh. ...Oh no. ...Garingo — that was — that was Shelly's rock. ...That was her favourite rock.
[whispers] ...I — I saw the whole thing. ...The tail-feather, the branch, the leaf, the twig, the rock — ...all of it. ...In sequence. ...Pretty clear sequence, actually.
...The wind. ...The WIND did it.
...Mm. ...Now, the wind that morning, little ones — ...you remember — ...was barely moving. ...But Garingo... ...had said his sentence. ...And the sentence was out. ...And once a sentence is out, sometimes the bird who said it has to live in it for a while.
[excited] Garingo — Garingo, that — that wasn't the wind. ...The wind isn't even — — the wind is barely a wind today. ...I'd feel a wind. ...I would. ...I'm a BEAR. ...Bears feel wind.
It WAS the wind. ...A — a small wind. ...A pocket of wind. ...Local wind. ...Highly local. ...You wouldn't have felt it from down THERE.
[whispers] ...Is that — is that a thing? ...Highly local wind? ...That's — that's not — Bongo, is that a thing?
[whispers] ...I — I don't think so? ...I'm — I'm a bear, not a — — I don't know all the winds. ...There might be a wind I don't know.
...EXACTLY. ...There are MANY winds. ...Most of them — — most of them, frankly, undocumented.
Now... while Garingo was busy inventing weather, ...somebody we have not yet seen this morning... was already on her way down the path.
And Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly — was walking, slow as a Tuesday in summer, the way she walks every morning... ...to come and sit by her favourite rock.
Mm. ...Watching Bongo and Zippy stand there, listening to Garingo invent his weather... ...I remembered something. ...A line from the Bible. ...About the truth. ...About what the truth does for a person, in the end.
And further down the path — slow as Tuesday — Shelly came on. ...She hadn't seen the rock yet. ...She didn't know. ...But Bongo could see her coming. ...And Zippy could see her coming. ...And Garingo... ...could see her coming.
[whispers] ...Garingo. ...Garingo. ...She's coming. ...She's gonna see the rock.
...Then — — then I shall TELL her. ...About the wind.
[whispers] ...Like a bell. ...On a cold rock.
Mm. ...Bless him. ...He still mutters that one. ...Something the Mudpuppies told him. ...He's still not sure what it means. ...Neither am I, truth be told.
...Mm. ...Morning, everyone. ...Mm. ...That is... ...not where my rock is.
Shelly! ...Shelly — — Shelly, friend of mine — — there has been... ...an INCIDENT. ...A weather event.
...A weather event.
A WIND event. ...A — a small but mighty wind. ...A pocket. ...Highly local. ...You wouldn't have felt it. ...Most beings wouldn't have. ...The wind in question was, ...frankly, ...selective.
...A selective wind.
[whispers] ...Shelly — Shelly, I — I have to say. ...I saw — I saw it. ...The whole — — the whole loop. ...And the tail. ...And the branch. ...And the leaf. ...And the twig. ...And the — — your rock.
[whispers] ...I saw it too. ...The sequence. ...Pretty clear sequence. ...I — I'm sorry, Garingo, but it was — it was a sequence.
...The wind. ...The wind.
...Garingo. ...Look at me. ...Look at the rock. ...And look at the wind.
Now, Garingo... ...looked at Shelly. ...Looked at the rock. ...And then he tilted his bright head, the way a parrot does when it's listening to something it can't see — ...and he listened... ...to the wind.
...And the wind, ...bless its quiet day, ...had almost nothing to say.
...The wind.
And that — bless his bright feathers — was about when Garingo got smaller. ...Not in dignity. ...In honesty.
...It was me. ...It was — — it was my tail. ...My — my loop. ...I clipped the branch. ...And the branch did the leaf, and the leaf did the twig, and the twig did your rock. ...It was me, Shelly. ...I'm sorry. ...I'm — I'm so sorry.
...Mm. ...I know.
...You — — you knew?
...The wind hasn't moved since Tuesday. ...I knew.
[whispers] ...I — I really don't got this. ...I don't even know what's happening anymore. ...Are we — are we happy now?
...Mm. ...We're getting there, Bongo. ...We're getting there.
Now, the rock — bless its broken heart — was not going to un-crack itself. ...That's not how rocks work. ...But Garingo... ...had a thought. ...And for the first time all morning, ...he didn't ANNOUNCE the thought. ...He just had it.
...Shelly. ...I — — could I — could I sit with the two pieces? ...With you? ...For a bit?
...Mm. ...Yes. ...You can sit with the pieces. ...I'll get there. ...I always do.
And just like that — ...the loudest bird in the wood had become the quietest one in the morning. ...The wind, ...bless it, ...kept doing exactly what it had been doing. ...Which was very nearly nothing. ...And the four of them sat — ...one tortoise, one parrot, one bear cub, one hummingbird — ...and looked at a small broken rock. ...And it was, ...somehow, ...a better morning than it had been ten minutes earlier.
Now, after all that... we wandered back over here to the pond, with the morning fully woken up now, and we all sat down together by the water. ...And I asked them — friends, what do you think it was, in the end, that made it work?
I — — I think it was when I stopped. ...When I stopped explaining. ...The truth is — — the truth is a lot shorter than the lie. ...The lie kept needing more sentences. ...The truth was just — — it was just one sentence. ...One.
[whispers] ...Um. ...I think... ...it was when Shelly said 'look at the wind'. ...I — — I think she knew the whole time. ...She just waited. ...Until Garingo was ready. ...That's — — that's hard. ...Waiting like that.
...Mm. ...I just waited. ...Garingo got there. ...He always does.
...Hm. ...Now... isn't that something? ...Funny how the wind got so much of the blame... ...and the truth was just sitting there the whole time. ...Quiet. ...Patient. ...Waiting for the bird who needed to say it.
And that, my little ones, is how I remember it. ...The morning the wind did not, in fact, do it.
Now, before you go — the Mudpuppy brothers have something they very much want to tell us. ...They have a topic. ...And bless their puddle, they have OPINIONS. ...Heaven help us all.
Welcome — yes welcome — TO MUDPUPPY MINUTES!
[playful] MUDPUPPY MINUTES! ...Mudpuppy MIN-utes!
[playful] MUDPUPPY MINUTES BUT LOUDER!
Today, friends — today, we shall explain... a very important word. ...The word is... THE TRUTH.
[playful] OH! OH! I know this one! ...The truth — — the truth is the THING THAT TASTES LIKE A RAINDROP. ...You drink it, and you go — — 'oh — that was THE TRUTH'.
[playful] NO! ...The truth is the SHAPE of a frog's belly! ...A frog belly is ROUND, and ROUND is HONEST. ...You cannot tell a lie with a round belly! ...Impossible!
Brothers. BROTHERS. ...You are both — — and I say this with love — — wrong. ...The truth is SHINY. ...The truth is LOUD. ...And the truth is COLD. ...Like a bell. ...On a cold rock.
[playful] ...Wait. ...So the truth tastes like a raindrop.
[playful] AND IT IS BELLY-SHAPED.
AND IT IS A BELL. ...ON A COLD ROCK.
[playful] Mudpuppies have solved it.
[playful] Truth is shiny. ...Loud. ...AND cold.
Mudpuppies, mudpuppies — we have solved it. ...Truth is — ...frankly — ...wet. ...Wet AND cold. ...Mudpuppy out!
...Mm. ...Well. ...That was not, ...strictly speaking, ...the truth.
Now, my little ones — — for the record — — the truth is not a raindrop, ...the truth is not a belly, ...and the truth is not, ...as far as I'm aware, ...a bell. ...The truth is just — — what really happened. ...That's it. ...Just what really happened. ...Said out loud.
[excited] Old Timber — ...what did we learn today?
Mm. ...We learned, my little ones... that telling the truth is harder than telling a lie at first. ...But the truth only needs one sentence. ...And the lie keeps needing more.
And there's a line from the Bible, little ones. ...From the Gospel of John — one of the book-stories about Jesus and the people who knew him — that says: ...'And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.' ...Two thousand years old, give or take. ...'Ye shall know the truth.' ...That's what Garingo found out this morning. ...The truth made him a little smaller. ...And bless his bright feathers — ...it also made him free.
Until the next breeze brings us together, little ones. ...Be honest out there.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.